prep release: v1.59.0 (#6460)
apollographql/router: CHANGELOG.md

This project adheres to [Semantic Versioning v2.0.0](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html).

> # [1.59.0] - 2024-12-16

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# [1.59.0] - 2024-12-17
```

### Ensure cost directives are picked up when not explicitly imported ([PR #6328](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6328))

With the recent composition changes, importing `@cost` results in a supergraph schema with the cost specification import at the top. The `@cost` directive itself is not explicitly imported, as it's expected to be available as the default export from the cost link. In contrast, uses of `@listSize` to translate to an explicit import in the supergraph.

Old SDL link

```
@link(
    url: "https://specs.apollo.dev/cost/v0.1"
    import: ["@cost", "@listSize"]
)
```

New SDL link

```
@link(url: "https://specs.apollo.dev/cost/v0.1", import: ["@listSize"])
```

Instead of using the directive names from the import list in the link, the directive names now come from `SpecDefinition::directive_name_in_schema`, which is equivalent to the change we made on the composition side.

By [@tninesling](https://github.com/tninesling) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6328

### Fix query hashing algorithm ([PR #6205](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6205))

> > [!IMPORTANT]
> > If you have enabled [distributed query plan caching](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/router/configuration/distributed-caching/#distributed-query-plan-caching), updates to the query planner in this release will result in query plan caches being regenerated rather than reused.  On account of this, you should anticipate additional cache regeneration cost when updating to this router version while the new query plans come into service.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

        oplimits.height:
          value:
            query: height
          type: histogram
          unit: number
          description: "Height for an operation"
        oplimits.root_fields:
          value:
            query: root_fields
          type: histogram
          unit: number
          description: "Root fields for an operation"
```

By [@bnjjj](https://github.com/bnjjj) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6324

### More consistent attributes on `apollo.router.operations.persisted_queries` metric ([PR #6403](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6403))

Version 1.28.1 added several *unstable* metrics, including `apollo.router.operations.persisted_queries`.

When an operation is rejected, Router includes a `persisted_queries.safelist.rejected.unknown` attribute on the metric. Previously, this attribute had the value `true` if the operation is logged (via `log_unknown`), and `false` if the operation is not logged. (The attribute is not included at all if the operation is not rejected.) This appears to have been a mistake, as you can also tell whether it is logged via the `persisted_queries.logged` attribute.

> Router now only sets this attribute to true, and never to false. This may be a breaking change for your use of metrics; note that these metrics should be treated as unstable and may change in the future.

Author: ```suggestion
Router now only sets this attribute to true, and never to false. This is a change for your use of metrics; note that these metrics are unstable and may change.
```

Reviewer 2: Note these metrics are unstable an will continue to change.

This project adheres to [Semantic Versioning v2.0.0](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html).

# [1.59.0] - 2024-12-16

## ❗ BREAKING ❗

### More consistent attributes on `apollo.router.operations.persisted_queries` metric ([PR #6403](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6403))

Version 1.28.1 added several *unstable* metrics, including `apollo.router.operations.persisted_queries`.

When an operation is rejected, Router includes a `persisted_queries.safelist.rejected.unknown` attribute on the metric. Previously, this attribute had the value `true` if the operation is logged (via `log_unknown`), and `false` if the operation is not logged. (The attribute is not included at all if the operation is not rejected.) This appears to have been a mistake, as you can also tell whether it is logged via the `persisted_queries.logged` attribute.

Router now only sets this attribute to true, and never to false. This may be a breaking change for your use of metrics; note that these metrics should be treated as unstable and may change in the future.

> By [@glasser](https://github.com/glasser) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6403

Reviewer: @glasser these metrics have been documented as unstable? If it's an unstable metric and is documented as such, I don't think this would constitute as a breaking change.

Reviewer 3: In the CHANGELOG itself, yeah.

Reviewer: As talked about in slack: metrics are not part of the public API, and these particular ones were declared unstable. So this is not considered a breaking change.

> ### Drop experimental reuse fragment query optimization option ([PR #6354](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6354))

Reviewer: @dariuszkuc removing an experimental feature is not a breaking change [[our docs](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/graphos/reference/feature-launch-stages#experimental)]. I'll move this to the `maintenance` section of the change log.

By [@glasser](https://github.com/glasser) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6198

### General availability of native query planner

The router's native, Rust-based, query planner is now [generally available](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/graphos/reference/feature-launch-stages#general-availability) and enabled by default.

The native query planner achieves better performance for a variety of graphs. In our tests, we observe:

* 10x median improvement in query planning time (observed via `apollo.router.query_planning.plan.duration`)
* 2.9x improvement in router’s CPU utilization
* 2.2x improvement in router’s memory usage 

> Note: you can expect generated plans and subgraph operations in the native
query planner to have slight differences when compared to the legacy, JavaScript-based query planner. We've ascertained these differences to be semantically insignificant, based on comparing ~2.5 million known unique user operations in GraphOS as well as
comparing ~630 million operations across actual router deployments in shadow
mode for a four month duration.

> The native query planner supports Federation v2 supergraphs. If you are using Federation v1 today, see our [migration guide](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/graphos/reference/migration/to-federation-version-2) on how to update your composition build step and subgraph changes are typically not needed.

Reviewer 2: I can't parse this sentence. Is something missing?

Author: [a2ee1a1](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6460/commits/a2ee1a1fd236fe8956af19498e43f9c34fcc9046)

> The native query planner supports Federation v2 supergraphs. If you are using Federation v1 today, see our [migration guide](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/graphos/reference/migration/to-federation-version-2) on how to update your composition build step and subgraph changes are typically not needed.

Author: ```suggestion
The native query planner supports Federation v2 supergraphs. If you are using Federation v1 today, see our [migration guide](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/graphos/reference/migration/to-federation-version-2) on how to update your composition build step. Subgraph changes are typically not needed.
```
